---
toc: true
layout: post
description: The introduction blog to start in GAN world
title: Generative Adversarial Networks
hide: true
---
We have come across various articles and posts about AI being capable of producing human like speech or generating images of non-existing people that are difficult to distinguish from real-life existence. These AI systems are built upon generative adversarial networks (GANs) - which Facebook AI research director Yann LeCun called "*most interesting idea in last 10 years in ML*" GANs were introduced in a [paper](!https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661) by Ian Goodfellow and other researchers at the University of Montreal, including Yoshua Bengio, in 2014.

GANs' potential for both good and evil is huge, because they can learn to mimic any distribution of data. That is, GANs can be taught to create worlds eerily similar to our own in any domain: images, music, speech, prose. They are robot artists in a sense, and their output is impressive - poignant even. But they can also be used to generate fake media content and are the technology underpinning Deepfakes.

To understand GANs, we need to understand generative algorithms and its counterpart discriminative algorithms.

## Background: Generative Models v/s Discriminative Models

### Discriminative Models
Discriminative models classifies the input data; i.e. given the features of an instance of data, they predict the label or cateogry to which the data belongs. For example, given , all the words in an email (this is data instance), a discriminative model would predict whether the email is `spam` or `not_spam`. `spam` is one of the labels, and the bag of words gathered from the email are the features that constitute the input data. When this problem is expressed mathematically, the label is called as $Y$ and the features are called as $X$. The formualtion $P(Y|X)$ is used to mean "*the probability of y given x*" which in this case would translate to "the probability that an email is spam given the words it contains".

So discriminative models maps features to labels. They are concerned solely with that correlation. Discriminative models directly learns the conditional distribution $P(Y\|X)$.

### Generative Models
On the other hand, generative models learns the joint probability distribution $P(X,Y)$ by explicitly learning $P(X|Y)$ and $P(Y)$, and then uses it to compute $P(Y|X)$ through 
Bayes rule.

$$
Given \space a \space model \space of \space the \space joint \space distribution, \space P(X,Y), \space marginal \space distribution \space of \space X \space \& \space Y \space can \space be \space calculated \space as: \\
P(X) = \sum_{y}P(X, Y = y) \space \space and \\
P(Y) = \int_{x}P(Y, X = x)
$$

considering $X$ as continuous, hence integrating over it and $Y$ as discrete hence summing over it.

Either conditional distribution can be computed as:

$$
P(Y|X) = \frac{P(X,Y)}{P(X)}
$$

Thats how, we can compute $P(Y|X)$ in generative models.


<span class = "highlight">*One way think about generative models from GANs perspective is that they do the opposite of discriminative models.*</span> Instead of predicting labels given the features, generative models attempt to predict features given a certain label i.e. $P(X\|Y)$. Understanding it from the email example, generative model tries to answer this: Assuming the given eamil is `spam`, how likely are these features? While discriminative models care about relation between $Y$ and $X$, generative models care about <span class = "highlight">"how you get $X$?"</span>

Formal Definitions:

* A **discriminative** model learns a function that maps the input data `X` to some desired output class label `Y`. In probabilistic terms, they directly learn the conditional distribution `P(Y|X)`.
* A **generative** model tries to learn joint probability of the input data and labels simultaneously, i.e. `P(X,Y)`. This is converted to `P(X|Y)` for classification via Bayes rule, but the generative ability could be used for something else as well, such as creating new `(X,Y)` sample.


**Refereces**
1. [A Beginner's Guide to Generatvive Adversarial Networks (GANs)](!https://wiki.pathmind.com/generative-adversarial-network-gan)



